---
title: Promoting Positive Behaviour and Use of Control, Restraint and Discipline
---


## Scope

This chapter provides guidance for carers and staff in relation to
supporting and promoting positive behaviour.

This chapter is compliant with the Fostering Services National Minimum
Standards and Regulations 2011, Standard 3 Promoting positive behaviour
and relations

## Encouraging and Rewarding Children

Whilst children bring their own values and behaviours to placements,
foster carers play a key role in influencing children.

The culture of the household, generated by the carers, is crucial.
Foster carers are expected to understand, manage and deal with
children's behaviour including encouraging them to take responsibility
for their behaviour and helping them to learn how to resolve conflict. A
restrictive, unsupportive, discouraging and punishing culture will
result in instability, hostility and possibly severe disruption.

All foster placements will have clear, fair boundaries, to enable
children to feel safe, encouraged and appropriately rewarded; and to
help ensure that they will thrive and do well. Foster carers who adopt
this approach will also experience less instability and disruption.

When caring for foster children, foster carers should at all times
endeavour to:

      - Listen to and empathise with children, respect their thoughts and feelings and take their wishes into consideration.
      - Look for things that are going well, or any step in the right direction, and appropriately reward it.

### Rewards

Rewards should be used in a creative and diverse way, specific to
children\'s needs, capabilities and interests.

This may mean that children are rewarded with toys, games, activities or
monetary rewards. However, all \'tangible\' rewards should be
accompanied by use of \'non tangible\' encouragement and support - by
carers demonstrating to children that they have done well. Such \'non
tangible\' rewards include praising, smiling, touching and hugging
children.

Children usually benefit, early on, from rewards which may appear to
outweigh that which is expected. This is normal; over time rewards can
be more relevant as children\'s self esteem and skills improve.

For example:

      * Children who have few social or life skills and whose self esteem and confidence is low may require forms of encouragement and reward which are intensive, frequent or even excessive in order to help/remind them that they are doing well and appreciated.
      * A child who has previously been unable to get up for school may be offered a present or activity for getting up on time for a few days. Over time, as children achieve what is expected, such rewards should be reduced or children should be expected to achieve more for the same or a similar reward.

However, it should also be borne in mind that some children cannot
tolerate praise as it undermines the low perception they have of
themselves. For these children smaller more specific praise is needed.

## Minimum House Rules

All carers should have house rules, setting out their expectations for
how things are managed within the home. This should be explained to
children, with the reasons for the rules and they should also know that
that there are rules for everyone. They should not feel that they are
being treated with less regard than other members of the household.
Ideally children should know these expectations before they are placed.

House rules will cover the following expectations:

      - No smoking
      - Keep own bedroom clean and tidy
      - Do not go into any other bedroom
      - Be dressed all the time
      - If you have gone out, return home at the time your carer has said
      - Always be where you say you will be
      - If you want to change your plans when you are out ask permission from your carer first
      - Do not hurt any member of your foster family
      - Do not engage in Bullying of any type both in or outside the foster home
      - Do not hurt any pet of the foster family
      - Homework must be done
      - If you have been excluded from school, school work will be done at home
      - When you use the bathroom or toilet always close the door
      - If you have any problems try and talk to your carer
      - Try to consider other people's feelings

## Sanctions

### Guidance on use of Sanctions

Sanctions can be very effective but, before imposing them, think about
it.

Most looked after children have come to view themselves, and are viewed,
as failures. They have had their fill of sanctions, usually imposed
inconsistently, unfairly or as acts of revenge.

Before imposing sanctions, carers should do all they can to support and
encourage children to do well. If children do not behave acceptably,
strategies should be adopted that are encouraging and rewarding.

Rather than noticing and sanctioning misbehaviour it is always better to
notice and reward good behaviour - or any step in the right direction.
For example, it may be more effective to allow a child to have use of a
video or TV at bedtime for getting up on time; rather than taking the TV
away for getting up late. Same deal, different meaning!

The former is discouraging and causes resentment; the latter is
encouraging, can improve self esteem and relationships between children
and carers.

**Be creative, think outside the box!**

If children continue to behave in unacceptable ways, they should be
reminded about what is expected and given further encouragement to get
it right. If misbehaviour persists or is serious, effective use of
reprimands can act as a disincentive or firm reminder. If this does not
work, or may not, sanctions may be effective.

Where sanctions are used they must be reasonable and the minimum
necessary to achieve the objective. Also, there should be a belief that
the sanction will have the desired outcome - increasing the possibility
that acceptable behaviour will follow.

If sanctions are imposed, carers should apply the following principles:

      - Sanctions must be the exception, not the rule. A Last Resort.
      - Sanctions must __not__  be imposed as acts of revenge or retaliation.
      - Think before imposing a sanction; don't apply it in the heat of the moment.
      - Sanctions may only be imposed upon children for persistent or serious misbehaviour; where reminders and reprimands have already failed or are likely to fail.
      - Sanctions should only be used if there is a reasonable chance they will have the desired effect of making the point and in reducing or preventing further unacceptable behaviour.
      - Before applying any sanction, make sure the child is aware that his/her behaviour is unacceptable and, if possible, warn him/her that sanctions will be applied if the unacceptable behaviour continues.
      - It is the certainty not the severity of sanctions that is important.
      - Sanctions should only last as long as they need to, thus allowing the child the opportunity to make a fresh start as quickly as possible.

### Non Approved Sanctions

The following sanctions are non-approved, which means they may never be
imposed upon children:

      - Any form of corporal punishment; i.e. any intentional application of force as punishment, including slapping, punching, rough handling and throwing missiles.
      - Any sanction relating to the consumption or deprivation of food or drink;
      - Any restriction on a child's contact with his or her parents, relatives or friends; visits to the child by his or her parents, relatives or friends; a child's communication with any of the persons listed below*; or his or her access to any telephone helpline providing counselling or advice for children. This does not prevent contact or communication being restricted in exceptional circumstances, where it is necessary to do so to protect the child or others.
      - Any requirement that a child wear distinctive or inappropriate clothes;
      - The use or withholding of medication or medical or dental treatment;
      - The intentional deprivation of sleep;
      - The modification of a child's behaviour through bribery or the use of threats;
      - Any sanction which may humiliate a child or could cause them to be ridiculed;
      - The imposition of any fine or financial penalty, other than a requirement for the payment of a reasonable sum by way of reparation. (The Court may impose fines upon children which staff and carers should encourage and support them to repay.)
      - Any intimate physical examination of a child;
      - The withholding of aids/equipment needed by a disabled child;
      - Any measure which involves a child in the imposition of any measure against any other child; or the sanction of a group of children for the behaviour of an individual child;
      - Swearing at the child or the use of foul, demeaning or humiliating language or measures;

The person\'s with whom the child may have contact, in relation to c.
above,

      - Any officer of the Children and Family Court Advisory and Support Service appointed for the child;
      - Any social worker for the time being assigned to the child by his placing authority;
      - Any person appointed in respect of any requirement of the procedure specified in the Representations Procedure (Children) Regulations 1991;
      - Any Independent Visitor;
      - Any person authorised by the Regulatory Authority;
      - Any person authorised by the local authority in whose area the children's home is situated;
      - Any person authorised in accordance with section 80(2) of the 1989 Act by the Secretary of State to conduct an inspection of the children's home and the children there.

### Approved Sanctions

The following sanctions may be imposed upon children:

      - Confiscation or withdrawal of a telephone or mobile phone in order to protect a child or another person from harm, injury or to protect property from being damaged.
      - Restriction on sending or receiving letters or other correspondence (including the use of electronic or internet correspondence) in order to protect a child or another person from harm, injury or to protect property from being damaged.
      - Reparation, involving the child doing something to put right the wrong they have done; e.g. repairing damage or returning stolen property.
      - Restitution, involving the child paying for all or part of damage caused or the replacement of misappropriated monies or goods. No more than two thirds of a child's pocket money may be taken in these circumstances if the payment is small and withdrawn in a single weekly amount. Larger amounts may be paid in restitution but must be of a fixed amount with a clear start and end period. If the damage is serious or the size of payment particularly large then the child's social worker should be informed of the matter.
      - Curtailment of leisure activities, involving a child being prevented from participating in such activities.
      - Additional chores, involving a child undertaking additional chores over and above those they would normally be expected to do.
      - Early bedtimes, by up to half an hour or as agreed with the child's social worker
      - Removal of equipment, for example the use of a TV or video/DVD player.
      - Loss of privileges, for example the withdrawal of the privilege of staying up late.
      - Suspension of pocket money for short periods, whereby the money is added to the savings account and can be re-deemed at a later date.

### Recording of Sanctions

If a child receives a sanction it is recorded on the carer's daily
recording log.

## Managing offending behaviour

Relationship with the Police and planning for change

Everyone involved in looking after Young People must develop
co-operative relationships with the Police and should seek their advice
on matters of concern, security and crime prevention.

Illegal behaviour should not be condoned, but it is important to be
mindful of our duty to consider the overall welfare of Young People;
which may mean recognising that illegal activity is taking place and
working to minimise risks and consequences.

Unless otherwise set out in writing, for example in a child's Placement
Plan any suspicion on the part of staff/carers that a child has or is
likely to commit an offence must be discussed with the manager or carers
supervising social worker; who should consult the child's social worker
if the behaviour is persistent or serious.

### Reporting Incidents to the Police

Any decision to report matters to the Police or consult them should
normally only be taken in consultation with the manager of the placement
/ senior care manager of the foster placement and the Senior Care
Manager of child's social worker.

If staff or carers are considering contacting the Police at times when
social work or WF offices are closed and they cannot contact their
manager or supervising social worker, they must contact either the
on-call worker for WF or the placing authority's [Emergency Duty
Team](/procedures/emergency_duty_team).

Where there are concerns that a child is engaged or likely to be engaged
in offending behaviour, measures must be adopted to reduce or prevent
it. Where the behaviour is persistent or serious, the child's Placement
Plan must include a summary of the concerns and the strategies being
adopted to change the behaviour.

In this respect, other relevant agencies, including the Police, may be
consulted and involved.

If necessary the [Placement Plan](/procedures/placement_plan) should
indicate whether and in what circumstances the Police should be
contacted should suspicions arise about offending behaviour.

4.2 Managing serious disruption

Staff/carers are expected to do all that is reasonable to manage the
behaviour of Young People Looked After, which includes the management of
confrontational and disruptive behaviour.

As a Last Resort, Physical Intervention can be used to prevent Young
People or others being injured or to prevent Damage to Property. (see
[Restraint policy](/procedures/restraint_policy))

If the potential injury is significant or the potential damage is
serious, Restraint can also be used but if this is not possible or
control is lost and the risks of injury or damage escalate, the Police
must be called for assistance.

If possible, the child's social worker or WF Registered Manager/Director
should give authorisation to such action, but if this is not possible,
staff/carers should act as they see fit and then inform the child's
social worker as soon as possible thereafter.

If a child is known to be violent, the concerns and Strategies designed
to reduce or prevent the behaviour must be set out in his/her Placement
Plan.

Apart from individual Placement Plans, staff/carers must do all they can
to create a safe and positive living environment for Young People.
However, staff/carers must take what action is immediately necessary to
prevent violence or assaults from occurring.

This may include the use of Restraint or other forms of Physical
Intervention.

The Police will not normally be contacted unless the violence is
serious, persistent or the victim wishes to make a complaint to the
Police.

If victims wish to make such a complaint they should be encouraged only
to do so after having given consideration to the implications and
consequences for all concerned.

If victims do decide to contact the Police they should be offered
support and advice by a manager/supervisor or supervising social worker.

### Theft or damage to property

If there is a suspicion that a child may be engaged or likely to be
engaged in any criminal activity including theft or malicious damage,
staff/carers must act to reduce or prevent the behaviour.

This may include taking steps to recover, repair or restore the property
rather than contacting the Police.

If the offending behaviour is persistent or serious, the Police may be
contacted. However, unless there are immediate risks that a serious
offence may be committed, the child's social worker and the cares
supervising social worker should be consulted before a decision is
taken.

### Notification and Recording

If the Police are called to provide assistance in managing an Incident
of any kind in a home, the child's social worker and manager must be
notified as soon as practicable afterwards.

There are a number of records that must be completed in the event of an
Incident, whether or not the Police were called for assistance

## Self Harming

### Planning and Prevention

Self-harming or self-injury behaviour is the deliberate act of causing
harm to one-self, with or without an intention to die.

It can take many forms from scratching to the swallowing of harmful
substances and taking overdoses. It can include under-eating or
over-eating.

If a child is suspected or found to be self-harming, the strategies that
should be taken are those determined by any existing plan, for example,
in the child's Behaviour Management Plan which if known prior to
placement should have been agreed at the placement agreement meeting.

If no plan or Strategy exists, all reasonable measures should be taken
to reduce or prevent continuation of the behaviour.

This may include providing additional supervision, confiscation of
materials that may be used to self-harm or, as a last resort, using of
Physical Intervention or calling for assistance from the emergency
services.

If there is any suspicion that the child may be involved in
self-harming, the social worker and supervising social worker must be
informed and a risk assessment undertaken with a view to deciding
whether a strategy should be adopted to reduce or prevent the behaviour.

If necessary, specialist advice or support should be sought. This may be
most forthcoming from the CAMHS Team who has a specialist worker who
supports Looked After Children.

### Notifications

Notifications of Minor or Non Persistent Self-Harming

Minor or non persistent self-harming should be notified to the child's
social worker and the carer's supervising social worker at the first
opportunity. A decision about whether to notify the parents will be
taken by the social worker.

Notifications of Serious or Persistent Self-Harming

Serious or persistent self-harming is deemed to be an Incident and must
be notified to the child's social worker and supervising social worker
immediately following the incident as is possible.

The social worker should decide whether to inform the child's parent(s)
and, if so, who should do so.

Depending on the seriousness of the self-harming, other people/agencies
may have to be notified.

### Recording

Recording of Minor or Non Persistent Self Harming

Minor or non-persistent self-harming should be recorded in the carer's
daily record, including if first aid or medical treatment is provided in
which instance the medical log additionally has to be completed

Recording of Serious or Persistent Self Harming

Incidents of persistent or serious self-harming are deemed to be
Incidents, and must be recorded as such.

Please see Incidents guidance below for details of the records that must
be completed in the event of an Incident.

If First Aid or medical treatment is provided, it must also be recorded
in the carers daily record.

## Barricading

### Planning and prevention

If there is any risk that a child may lock or barricade him/herself in a
room so as to prevent access by the carers, a Risk Assessment must be
undertaken and a suitable strategy adopted to reduce or prevent it,
preferably in writing.

If there are risks relating to an individual child known prior to
placement this should be accounted for in a Behaviour Management Plan
agreed at the placement agreement meeting

### General Principals

If children lock or barricade themselves in a room so as to prevent
access by those caring for them, the actions that are necessary will
depend on the risks posed.

#### Low Risk

If the risks are low, which means that there is no perceived risk of
Injury, damage to property or of any offence being committed, the
situation should be monitored and efforts made to obtain the child's
co-operation to resolve it satisfactorily.

The strategies that should be adopted will depend on the age, level of
understanding of the child and other circumstances on the day. However,
carers should do what they can to maintain a low risk, and not to
escalate the situation.

#### Increased Risk

If there is a risk of Injury, damage to property or of an offence being
committed, the action taken should depend on the immediacy and
seriousness of those risks.

The strategies that should be adopted will depend on the age, level of
understanding of the child and other circumstances on the day. However,
carers should monitor the situation, doing what they can to reduce the
risks. All decisions and actions taken must be recorded.

If possible, the child's social worker and the carers supervising social
worker/registered manager should be consulted before actions are taken.
However, it is for carers, on the spot, to decide what actions are
necessary, having considered all the risks and strategies that are
available to them.

If at all possible, carers must act so as to reduce or prevent the need
to act with force but, if the risks escalate to an extent that Physical
Intervention, including forced entry is necessary; the carers may only
act in keeping with relevant procedures in this manual.

If it is not possible to deal with the matter in any other way, it is
preferable for carers to act in pairs when entering a room. When this is
possible the person who has physically opened the door should not be the
first to enter the room

### Notifications

There are different notification procedures depending on whether matters
are concluded with or without the co-operation of children.

#### With Co-operation

If the occurrence is concluded with the co-operation of the child, in
that no force has been used, the supervising social worker/registered
manager should be notified at the first opportunity; either one will
then decide whether to notify the child's social worker. The care must
always record the incident in their daily recording log

#### Without Co-operation

If carers have to use forced entry or physical Intervention, or the
Police are called for assistance, it is deemed to be an Incident and the
supervising social worker and child's social worker must be notified as
soon as possible.

Depending on the seriousness of the Incident, other people/agencies may
have to be notified. The Registered Managers, contains details of who
should be notified

## Searching

Carers are not permitted to conduct body searches, pat down searches,
searches of clothing worn by children or of their bedrooms.

Should carers suspect that a child is carrying or has concealed an item
which may place the child or another person at risk, they should try to
obtain the item by cooperation/negotiation.

If carers suspect that a child is concealing an item which may place
themselves or another person at risk, they must notify the agency or, in
an emergency, the Police, where it may be decided to be appropriate to
conduct a search of a child or a child's belongings if there is
reasonable cause to believe that the child has concealed weapons,
illegal drugs, other dangerous items or stolen goods and it is unlikely
that the items will not be given up without searching for them. Such
searches include searches of children's bedrooms

Any search carried out without the child's agreement may only be
undertaken where it is necessary to do so to prevent Significant Injury
or Serious Damage to Property.

The child must be informed at the first possible instance of what has
happened.

## Serious Incidents and Use of Physical Intervention

### Definition of incident

      - Physical Assault or violence caused to a child or member of the foster family
      - Injury of a serious nature, caused to a member of the public, child, member of the foster family or staff member
      - Barricading by children resulting in forced entry by a member of WF staff/ foster carer or the Police
      - Damage, of a serious nature, caused maliciously or non accidentally
      - Illegal access/possession of controlled drugs or substances by a child placed with WF a foster carer
      - Self harming, of a serious or persistent nature
      - Suicide, attempted suicide or death of a child
      - Searches of a child or a child’s belongings without the child’s permission
      - Bullying, of a persistent or serious nature
      - Serious verbal abuse and/or racial harassment
      - Physical Intervention (including Restraint) upon a child
      - Police or other emergency services being notified or attending an incident
      - Any other event/occurrence determined by a Manager as an Incident

In the event of any serious incident (e.g. accident, violence or
assault, damage to property), carers should take what actions they deem
to be necessary to protect children/themselves from immediate harm or
injury; and then notify the agency immediately.

If there is a risk of serious injury/harm or damage to property, carers
should not use any form or Physical Intervention except as a last resort
to prevent themselves or others from being injured or to prevent serious
damage to property. If any form of physical intervention is used, it
must be the least intrusive necessary to protect the child, carer(s) or
others.

At no time should carers act unless they are confident of managing the
situation safely, without escalation or further injury.

The agency will endeavour to deal with as many of the challenges that
are involved in caring for children without recourse to the involvement
of the Police, who should only be involved in two circumstances;

      * An emergency necessitating their immediate involvement to protect the child or others
      * Following discussion with their supervising social worker or the registered manager during working hours. Outside working hours then the Duty out of hours officer should be consulted

If any serious incident occurs or the Police are called, the supervising
social worker, or Registered Manager or the out of hours duty officer
must be notified without delay who will notify the relevant social
worker(s) and arrange for a full report to be made of the incident and
actions taken. The Regulatory Authority must also be notified.

\|

## Physical restraining:

\| \|

### Definition

\
Restraint is an act or the quality of holding back, limiting, or
controlling something or somebody. Physical restraint is by definition
against the child's stated will. Its aim is to take control from the
child, to stop them from doing whatever they are doing, using the
minimum amount of force and therefore the minimum amount of time
necessary. Recognising restraint\
\
Carers have to bear in mind that the legal "duty of care" that applies
to all those working with children means that "doing nothing" may be
construed by the law as "negligence" in terms of this duty. There are
circumstances when it would be appropriate to intervene physically to
prevent behaviour that is harmful to the child or others. Examples of
such circumstance might include:

      * • to prevent one child attacking another
      * • a younger child refusing to dress appropriately, such as refusing to wear shoes to go outside
      * • a child refusing to leave another person’s room
      * • to prevent a young child from running away (e.g. running onto a busy road, getting to close to the edge of railway platforms)

\
In such circumstances:

      * • Physical intervention without contact, such as standing in the way or some forms of intervention with contact, such as holding the child’s hand or placing a hand on their shoulder, may well be appropriate
      * • Some forms of physical intervention may have a positive impact on the child, such as holding or cuddling a distressed child, or holding a child for their own safety.

\
In themselves, none of the above interventions require any particular
recording although carers must always be mindful of the circumstances of
their intervention and if in doubt follow the instructions below for
recording physical constraints.\
\
Physical restraint must only be used:

      * • If a child is in immediate danger of harming themselves, others or causing significant damage to property.
      * • To defend yourself and others from physical violence or threatened violence.

\
Restraint should never be used:

      * • To establish control over a child or to demonstrate who is in charge
      * • To punish a child
      * • In a situation where it is possible for the foster carer to remove the other children and themselves out from danger Guidance on use of restraint

\
Carers should:\
\
• Use physical restraint as a measure of last resort • Ideally involve
more than one carer, even if the second carer does not physically
intervene but witnesses the intervention • Always seek to avoid the need
for physical restraint through dialogue or diversion • Where possible
pre-warn the child that a restraint might take place if their behaviour
continues • Have sound reasons for believing that other methods of
intervention would not be appropriate or would fail. • Give
consideration to the age and understanding of the child • Take into
account disability and cultural factors that might also be significant
in determining the type of intervention. • Be mindful at all times of a
child's previous experiences. A child who has been physically or
sexually abused may experience any form of physical contact differently
from how it was intended. • Not attempt any intervention if they do not
think it is achievable. • Give consideration to the involvement of the
emergency services, the timing and the place of the restraint, paying
attention to minimising the involvement of other children, as to witness
a restraint may be distressing for any child. • Not use restraint to
force compliance on the child's part or when there is no immediate risk
involved, or as a means of punishment. • Record any use of restraint as
soon as possible after incident. • Verbally advise the child's social
worker of the use of restraint within one working day at the latest.\
\
Special Needs and Children/Young People with a Mental Disorder or a
history of behaviour that has necessitated the use of restraint\
\
Wholistic Fostering promotes social inclusion, equality, and the social
model of disability. All disabled children will be treated with dignity.
It is accepted that some disabled children may have some behaviours
which are so challenging that restrictive physical interventions may be
needed as a last resort to safeguard the child following a duty of care.
These children should not be marginalised from living in a family home
because they may need to be restrained for their own safety, or that of
others. However, Wholistic Fostering would not offer a match if a
suitably experienced foster carer was not available.\
\
Where a suitably experienced foster carer is available then In cases
involving children who are disabled and/or may have special needs and/or
a mental health disorder, or a history of needing to be restrained then
a risk assessment should be undertaken prior to the placement being
agreed. The risk assessment will address the specific issues involving
the child and any foreseeable issues that may arise, likely to warrant
the use of force to restrain them. Any holding form of restraint would
only be agreed when all other alternatives have been exhausted and
subject to risk assessments and behaviour management plans. An example
where this may be necessary is where a child whose Special Education
Needs (SEN) and/or disability (whether physical or a learning
disability) is associated with extreme behaviour.\
\
An individual risk assessment and management plan will be essential for
children or a young person who's SEN and/or disabilities are associated
with:

      * • Communication impairments that make them less responsive to verbal communication
      * • Physical disabilities and/or sensory impairments
      * • Conditions that make them fragile, such as haemophilia, brittle bone syndrome or epilepsy or
      * • Dependence on equipment such a wheelchairs, breathing or feeding tubes

\
Those involved in the care and management of these children should
ensure they are as well informed as possible about the child's
behavioural characteristics or patterns stemming from their special
needs, disability or mental disorder, and make use of the knowledge and
insight that the child, their parents and other professionals involved
with the family can provide.\
\|

# Promoting Positive Behaviour

## Introduction

Children learn how to behave by watching, listening and talking to the
adults who care for them. Children develop their morals and values from
what they observe of how adults treat others.

Children need clear boundaries and consistent rules. You should have
high aspirations of a child/young person placed with you and be clear
about what is acceptable and not.

You are expected to understand, manage and deal with young people's
behaviour including encouraging children to take responsibility for
their behaviour and help them to learn how to resolve conflict.

## Helping the Child/Young Person to Settle in

Since your foster child is new to your home they will not know or
understand your rules unless you explain them. You will need to be
mindful of the child's background and early life experiences when
setting boundaries and expectations.

It is important that the child is treated consistently by everyone who
is dealing with them particularly when there are two carers.

Everyone needs to agree on an approach and stick to it. Depending on the
age of the child it is useful for them to be involved in conversations
about what behaviour is accepted and when appropriate to consider
possible consequences. On-going communication is really important and
can be helpful as you start to get to know each other.

All Wholistic carers will be expected to attend the tools to foster
course which gives some very helpful advice and tips on behaviour
management and positive reinforcement of good behaviour.

## Ways to Encourage Positive Behaviour

It is easy to only notice difficult behaviour, but by praising good
behaviour it encourages the child/young person to do this more. This is
an effective method of managing behaviour used by childcare
professionals.

The child needs to be aware of what they did well and when and should be
told as it is happening, not later or after the event.

You should record behaviour in the Children's Information file to help
you and other professionals understand it.

There are many techniques for helping to manage children's behaviour but
remember, children and young people respond best to people that they
like and respect and regardless of which technique you use, a positive
relationship is the key to helping them to behave positively.

One technique is the use of star charts which can be effective for young
children. They must be set up as a reward for the hard work a child puts
in. They must also be geared to a child's age.

Older children and teenagers can have similar systems. It may be useful
to talk to them about what they would really like and set something up
that rewards them for positive behaviour.

As a child/young person gets older they need to understand the
consequences of their behaviour and take some responsibility for it. You
might find that giving rewards at both agreed and less specified times
when you think that they are deserved can be the most effective way to
encourage good behaviour. It is also useful to try and talk to a child
when they are calm about a situation that may have happened, to not only
try and understand it but agree how it may be different in the future.

## Understanding Challenging Behaviour

A child/young person placed with you may be at a low point in their
lives. They are vulnerable and may \'act out\' their feelings.

This may show itself in ways such as bed-wetting, stealing food or
money, being rude or aggressive, destructive or running away.

You should talk to the child/young person to check out their reasons for
the behaviour and discuss the situation with the child's social worker
and your supervising social worker to agree how the behaviour can be
best managed.

Sometimes the child or young person might not understand the reasons
that things are going wrong for them and they might need your help to
make sense of what is happening. Children who experienced emotional
trauma may not be able to respond to reasoning or guidance in a positive
way. Patience, acceptance and consistency by the foster carer is most
important.

Remember that children and young people often do things wrong because of
their age and understanding and these things are hard to help or to iron
out. Examples of this might be clumsiness, sleeping in and being grumpy.
On the other hand, their experiences might leave them behaving badly and
until you both recognise this, it will be hard to change.

All children need rules and boundaries but these should be focused on
keeping them safe.

Try not to burn your bridges with threats and sanctions - use these
little and often, and when you feel they will be most effective.

Praise and positive responses often go a lot further than sanctions.
Remember that body language and the tone of your voice can sometimes
make things worse, e.g if you raise your voice they may also.

## Dealing with Unacceptable Behaviour

Most children present behaviour that needs to be responded to with some
form of discipline at some point. Because of their formative
experiences, some children may display very challenging behaviour.

Foster carer training, support and care planning should equip you with a
range of positive strategies for managing challenging behaviour and
discipline that is appropriate. Remember, in managing any unacceptable
behaviour, it is the behaviour that is not acceptable and not the child.

Within the Foster Care Agreement signed by you, you have agreed not to
use any form of corporal punishment

The term 'corporal punishment' should be taken to cover any intentional
application of force as punishment including smacking, slapping,
pinching, squeezing, shaking, throwing missiles, rough handling and all
other humiliating forms of treatment or punishment.

Similarly, restriction of contact visits to and from the birth family
and friends must not be used as a punishment, nor withholding of
receiving or sending of letters or phone calls.

Children and young people must not be stopped from getting in touch with
their social worker, Children's Guardian or Solicitor.

There are many different techniques used to help children and young
people with behavioural problems. Examples such as positive
reinforcement and contracts are all based on some sort of negotiated
agreement between a carer and child or young person.

In order for the technique to work, the adult must give clear messages,
be consistent, be persistent, watch what happens, draw conclusions, and
decide what must change.

This guidance does not prevent a person taking necessary physical
action, where any other course of action would be likely to fail to
avert an immediate danger of personal injury to the child or another
person, or to avoid immediate danger to property.

## Calming a Distressed Child/Young Person

Sometimes children become so excited that it affects their behaviour.
You may need to take them to one side and tell them that they are going
to remain there until they feel able to behave properly. Time-out must
be age appropriate and should not be used to increase distress in a
child.

A bedroom is not an appropriate place to use for punishment or time out.

With many children it is sometimes easier to remove yourself from a
situation to prevent further escalation, and promise to return when they
have calmed down.

Looked After Children should not receive any physical/corporal
punishment. The Foster Care Agreement you sign when you became a foster
carer says that this is not acceptable. The children you will care for
have frequently suffered Sexual, Physical and Emotional abuse. Therefore
it is important that you teach children about love and care rather than
anger and violence. It is the behaviour that is not acceptable not the
child/young person.

## Serious Incidents and Physical Intervention

If serious incident such as an accident, violence, assault, damage to
property takes place, you should do what is needed to protect
children/yourself from immediate harm; and then notify the fostering
service immediately. You should record the incident as soon as possible
on an incident sheet.

You should not use any form of Physical Intervention except as a last
resort to prevent you or others from being injured or to prevent serious
damage to property. Some carers receive training on understanding
behaviour and physical intervention but the rule above still applies in
these situations.

If any form of Physical Intervention is used, it must be the least
intrusive to protect the child, you or others.

At no time should you act unless you are confident of managing the
situation safely, without escalation or further injury.

You should endeavour to deal with as many of the challenges that are
involved in caring for children without the involvement of the Police,
who should only be involved if;

An emergency occurs that requires their immediate involvement to protect
the child or others;

Or

Following discussion with your supervising social worker or their
manager;

### The Out of Hours social worker.

If any serious incident occurs or the Police are called, the child's
social worker and your supervising social worker must be notified
without delay. You may be asked to provide a full written report of the
incident and actions taken. This will also involve notification to
Ofsted.

# Care, Control and restraint for Foster Carers

Discipline and control can prove difficult even in the best-run
families. There are extra challenges for the foster carers who care for
children and young people on behalf of Wholistic Fostering

All carers must attend training on behaviour management. When you were
approved by the Fostering Panel the foster carer agreement you signed
clearly stated that you must not use any form of corporal punishment.
This will include any intentional application of force as punishment.
Also it includes slapping, shaking, punching, rough handling and
throwing any missiles e.g. slippers, objects to hand. It would also
include pushing or punching in the hea of the moment or in response to
violence from the young people. It also includes other humiliating forms
of treatment or punishment (Standard 9 National Minimum Standards for
Fostering Services 2002).

There may be times when the behaviour of a child or young person is such
that it poses a serious risk to themselves or others or property.

The Fostering Services Regulations 2002, the National Minimum Standards
for Fostering and the UK National Standards for Foster Care make it
clear that:-

//**The fostering service ensures that: -** //

      * //**no form of corporal punishment is used on any child placed with a foster carer i.e. each child on foster care is protected from all forms of corporal punishment – smacking, slapping, shaking – and all other humiliating forms of treatment or punishment** //
      * //**no child placed with foster carers is subject to any measure of control, restraint or discipline which is excessive or unreasonable; and** //
      * //**physical restraint is used on a child only where it is necessary to prevent likely injury to the child or other persons or likely serious damage to property** // 

Many of the children and young people in foster care have experienced
rejection, abuse or loss and others have not had consistent boundaries
set for them in the past.

Children will grow up into a world where people will not always take
account of their difficult past. They need to be able to act with
consideration for others and for themselves.

The most effective means of maintaining control is by building good
relationships with children where there is an expectation of reasonable
behaviour. The disapproval of a respected adult without the withholding
of affection is an important way for children and young people to learn
about "right" and "wrong". Discipline should not be seen as a negative
act. Children who behave reasonably and considerately are more likely to
grow up into well-adjusted adults who feel good about themselves.

This policy is intended to help foster carers to make it clear what is
not allowed, and just as importantly, to make suggestions about what you
can do.

Firstly, some general hints for foster carers:-

      - Keep a sense of humour and a sense of proportion.
      - Recognise that children can make you angry and give yourselves some space.
      - Don’t always decide on a punishment straight away; give yourself a few minutes to think calmly.
      - Always explain to the child why you are upset by their behaviour and what you expect of them.
      - Be flexible. If a child’s behaviour has improved, let him/her know and if appropriate, lift the sanction.
      - Apologise if you have been wrong.

//**The purpose of guidelines .....** //

      * //**The guidelines provide a framework within which appropriate measures can be selected and applied.** //
      * //**They build on existing good practice in Wholistic Fostering and provide a clear policy statement on how unacceptable behaviour can effectively be managed while avoiding demeaning and intimidating solutions.** //
      * //**They confirm that certain responses are not acceptable. These include measures – implied or real – that may result in emotional harm, such as corporal punishment, intimidation or any abuse of adult power.** //
      * //**They help eliminate confusion and support the development of creative alternatives in more difficult cases.** //
      * //**They receive the full support of the agency.** //
      * //**They represent a framework within which carers can exercise an appropriate and consistent level of personal judgement, in line with individual needs.** // 

The issue of sanctions and their implementation will be regularly
reviewed by the Fostering Service.

#### Approved Sanctions

Sanctions must be

      * appropriate
      * strictly time-limited
      * flexible enough to be reviewed and rescinded at any time.

The use of any sanction by a foster carer is a matter of choice but
should take into account the age, understanding, physical condition,
situation and maturity of the child or young person.

REMEMBER NEWTON'S LAW: "for every action there is an equal and opposite
reaction". This law of physics applies to sanctions too! Every time that
you impose any form of control there will be a consequence for you and
not just for the child or young person. For example, if you "ground"
(keep in) a youngster, they will be in your house and you may get a
feeling of them being under your feet, they may be sulking about, or
playing their music at loud volume.

OUR ADVICE WHEN FACED WITH BEHAVIOUR THAT YOU DISAPPROVE OF IS:

      * THINK What are you fed up with?
      * THINK What do you wish to change?
      * THINK Which is the most appropriate sanction?
      * THINK How long should the sanction last?
      * THINK What will work?
      * THINK What will be the consequences for you and your family?
      * THINK What will it mean to the child or young person?
      * THINK How will you explain it to the child or young person?
      * THINK What has the child to do to get the sanction lifted?

If you have taken the time to consider these questions and your options
the chances are that you will not have reacted hastily or regret your
actions. The child or young person is also more likely to know exactly
what you disapprove of and why; this is important if you wish to change
their behaviour.

Here are some sanctions that might work in your home:-

#### Control of Money

#### - You can delay pocket money:

This is not a fine but a case of you withholding the young person's
pocket money for a suitable length of time. (This should not last longer
than a week.) The rules for children's homes say that you should only
withhold one third of their pocket money. This does not apply to foster
carers but is a useful guide for you. Withheld money should be saved by
you and returned to the young person in kind or directly at an
appropriate time.

#### - Financial compensation:

You can deduct pocket money to pay for deliberate damage or loss. This
should be at a reasonable level with regard to the young person's means
rather than seeking to cover the full cost of the damage or loss.
(Remember that as a foster carer we have advised you that have house
insurance for damage or loss caused by a foster child.)

### Extra chores

There is an expectation that any child living in a family should have
some responsibility for domestic chores as a matter of principle. You
may choose to impose extra tasks, for example, washing the pots (or
stacking the dishwasher!). Make sure they can do the job and that you
can put up with the broken crockery!

### Supervision

Instead of banning children from going out at all you can insist that
they don't go out on their own, and that you therefore supervise them.
An example would be to be with a young person if they cannot be trusted
to spend their clothing money on clothes. Make sure that you really want
to spend Friday nights hanging around before you use this one for a
week!

### Removal of possessions:

If a child is misusing possessions such as a computer, Gameboy, music
system or water pistol and is causing a nuisance to others or acting
dangerously with possessions you can remove them. Make sure children
know what they have to do to get the items back or how long they have to
wait. Any dangerous item should be confiscated and returned to their
family directly or via their social worker.

### Withdrawal of privileges:

We are talking here about extras such as special trips or treats, late
bedtimes etc. These privileges can be stopped by you; again they should
be stopped for a set time that you can keep to. A common example would
be stopping a child watching a favourite TV programme. Depriving a child
of regular meals is NOT an appropriate sanction.

### Changing routine:

You can alter a child's normal routine -- for example, by an early
bedtime or exclusion from an activity. Think hard about this sanction.
What does it mean to the child to be sent to bed early if they have
experienced sexual abuse for instance? The use of computer, TV or cd
player by a child and its replacement with more mundane tasks (like
speaking to you!) can be helpful.

We would not, however, recommend extra school homework as a punishment
-- the completion of homework should be encouraged as a matter of
routine.

### - Visits to and from friends

Control over place and timing of such visits is appropriate in many
circumstances. Most young people you care for will have great difficulty
in making and maintaining friendships so do think carefully about the
use and length of this sanction.

Restricting contact with family and relatives should NOT be used as a
sanction in any circumstances. If such contact is problematic and you
think it needs to change then you should discuss this with your
supervising social worker or the child/young person's social worker
BEFORE taking any other action.

Remember to record your concerns in the Contact book you have been
provided with by your supervising social worker.

### - Restriction of Movement

Generally referred to as "grounding" this is an appropriate sanction for
many young people. Try to be specific and time limited in the use of
this sanction, being kept in for 10 minutes may seem trivial to you but
will not be seen that way by the young person.

Groundings for more than a week should be the exception not the rule.
You can encourage youngsters' sense of being trusted by allowing them to
stay out later on appropriate occasions.

## Physical restraining:

Definition

Restraint is an act or the quality of holding back, limiting, or
controlling something or somebody. Physical restraint is by definition
against the child's stated will. Its aim is to take control from the
child, to stop them from doing whatever they are doing, using the
minimum amount of force and therefore the minimum amount of time
necessary.

Recognising restraint

Carers have to bear in mind that the legal "duty of care" that applies
to all those working with children means that "doing nothing" may be
construed by the law as "negligence" in terms of this duty.

There are circumstances when it would be appropriate to intervene
physically to prevent behaviour that is harmful to the child or others.
Examples of such circumstance might include:

      * to prevent one child attacking another
      * a younger child refusing to dress appropriately, such as refusing to wear shoes to go outside
      * a child refusing to leave another person’s room
      * to prevent a young child from running away (e.g. running onto a busy road, getting to close to the edge of railway platforms)

In such circumstances:

      * **Physical intervention without contact**, such as standing in the way or some forms of intervention with contact, such as holding the child’s hand or placing a hand on their shoulder, may well be appropriate
      * Some forms of physical intervention may have a positive impact on the child, such as holding or cuddling a distressed child, or holding a child for their own safety.

In themselves, none of the above interventions require any particular
recording although carers must always be mindful of the circumstances of
their intervention and if in doubt follow the instructions below for
recording physical constraints.

Physical restraint must only be used:

      * If a child is in immediate danger of harming themselves, others or causing significant damage to property.
      * To defend yourself and others from physical violence or threatened violence.

Restraint should never be used:

      * To establish control over a child or to demonstrate who is in charge
      * To punish a child  In a situation where it is possible for the foster carer to remove the other children and themselves out from danger

Guidance on use of restraint

Carers should:

      * Use physical restraint as a measure of last resort
      * Ideally involve more than one carer, even if the second carer does not physically intervene but witnesses the intervention
      * Always seek to avoid the need for physical restraint through dialogue or diversion
      * Where possible pre-warn the child that a restraint might take place if their behaviour continues
      * Have sound reasons for believing that other methods of intervention would not be appropriate or would fail.
      * Give consideration to the age and understanding of the child
      * Take into account disability and cultural factors that might also be significant in determining the type of intervention.
      * Be mindful at all times of a child’s previous experiences. A child who has been physically or sexually abused may experience any form of physical contact differently from how it was intended.
      * Not attempt any intervention if they do not think it is achievable.
      * Give consideration to the involvement of the emergency services, the timing and the place of the restraint, paying attention to minimising the involvement of other children, as to witness a restraint may be distressing for any child.
      * Not use restraint to force compliance on the child’s part or when there is no immediate risk involved, or as a means of punishment.
      * Record any use of restraint as soon as possible after incident.
      * Verbally advise the child’s social worker of the use of restraint within one working day at the latest.

Special Needs and Children/Young People with a Mental Disorder or a
history of behaviour that has necessitated the use of restraint

Wholistic Fostering promotes social inclusion, equality, and the social
model of disability. All disabled children will be treated with dignity.
It is accepted that some disabled children may have some behaviours
which are so challenging that restrictive physical interventions may be
needed as a last resort to safeguard the child following a duty of care.
These children should not be marginalised from living in a family home
because they may need to be restrained for their own safety, or that of
others. However, Wholistic Fostering would not offer a match if a
suitably experienced foster carer was not available.

Where a suitably experienced foster carer is available then In cases
involving children who are disabled and/or may have special needs and/or
a mental health disorder, or a history of needing to be restrained then
a risk assessment should be undertaken prior to the placement being
agreed. The risk assessment will address the specific issues involving
the child and any foreseeable issues that may arise, likely to warrant
the use of force to restrain them.

Any holding form of restraint would only be agreed when all other
alternatives have been exhausted and subject to risk assessments and
behaviour management plans. An example where this may be necessary is
where a child whose Special Education Needs (SEN) and/or disability
(whether physical or a learning disability) is associated with extreme
behaviour.

An individual risk assessment and management plan will be essential for
children or a young person who's SEN and/or disabilities are associated
with:

      * Communication impairments that make them less responsive to verbal communication
      * Physical disabilities and/or sensory impairments
      * Conditions that make them fragile, such as haemophilia, brittle bone syndrome or epilepsy or
      * Dependence on equipment such a wheelchairs, breathing or feeding tubes

Those involved in the care and management of these children should
ensure they are as well informed as possible about the child's
behavioural characteristics or patterns stemming from their special
needs, disability or mental disorder, and make use of the knowledge and
insight that the child, their parents and other professionals involved
with the family can provide.

## What if a foster carer oversteps the mark?

Situations may arise where, for all sorts of reasons, a foster carer
loses their cool and reacts in an unacceptable way.

If this happens discuss it as soon as practicable with your supervising
social worker, or, in their absence, with their team manager. An
investigation may have to follow to ensure the child's well-being and
protection.

## Record of Restraint Form

This form must be filled in within 24 hours of the restraint incident.
[Restraint
Form.](http://eforms.wholisticfostering.co.uk/foster-parent-forms/wffp11-restraining-report/)
